



DOTS                                                        A. Mortensen
Internet-Draft                                      Arbor Networks, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                              F. Andreasen
Expires: August 14, 2016                             Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                                 C. Gray
                                                           Comcast, Inc.
                                                               N. Teague
                                                          Verisign, Inc.
                                                       February 11, 2016


                DDoS Open Threat Signaling Architecture
                  draft-mortensen-dots-architecture-00

Abstract

   This document describes an architecture for establishing and
   maintaining DDoS Open Threat Signaling (DOTS) within and between
   networks.  The document makes no attempt to suggest protocols or
   protocol extensions, instead focusing on architectural relationships,
   components and concepts used in a DOTS deployment, as well as
   obstacles confronting a network operator looking to enable DOTS.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 14, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Mortensen, et al.        Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   DDoS Open Threat Signaling Architecture   February 2016


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
       1.1.1.  Key Words . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
       1.1.2.  Definition of Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.2.  Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     1.3.  Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   2.  Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.1.  Relationships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     2.2.  DOTS Operational Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     2.3.  Concepts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     2.4.  Components  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     2.5.  Obstacles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   3.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   4.  Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10

1.  Introduction

   Signaling the need for help defending against an active distributed
   denial of service (DDoS) attack requires a common understanding of
   mechanisms and roles among the parties coordinating attack response.
   The proposed signaling layer and supplementary messaging is the focus
   of DDoS Open Threat Signaling (DDoS).  DOTS proposes to standardize a
   method of coordinating defensive measures among willing peers to
   mitigate attacks quickly and efficiently.

   This document describes an architecture used in establishing,
   maintaining or terminating a DOTS relationship in a network or
   between networks.  DOTS enables hybrid attack responses, coordinated
   locally at or near the target of an active attack, as well as closer
   to attack sources in the network path.








Mortensen, et al.        Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   DDoS Open Threat Signaling Architecture   February 2016


1.1.  Terminology

1.1.1.  Key Words

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

1.1.2.  Definition of Terms

   The following terms are used to define relationships between
   elements, the data they exchange, and methods of communication among
   them:

   DDoS:  A distributed denial-of-service attack, in which attack
      traffic originates from widely distributed sources.  DDoS attacks
      are intended to cause ai negative impact on the availability of
      servers, services, applications, and/or other functionality of an
      attack target.

   attack target:  the network-enabled service, application, server, or
      some collection thereof, on which a DDoS attack is focused.

   attack telemetry:  collected network traffic characteristics enabling
      detection, classification and possible traceback of a DDoS attack.

   countermeasure:  An action or series of actions undertaken to
      distinguish and filter out DDoS attack traffic from valid traffic
      destined for an attack target.

   mitigation:  A defensive response against a detected DDoS attack,
      performed by an entity in the network path between attack sources
      and the attack target, either through inline deployment or some
      form of traffic diversion, consisting of one or more
      countermeasures.  The form mitigation takes is out of scope for
      this document.

   mitigator:  A network element capable of performing mitigation of a
      detected DDoS attack.

   DOTS client:  A DOTS-aware network element requesting attack response
      coordination with another DOTS-aware element, with the expectation
      that the remote element is capable of helping fend off the attack
      against the client.

   DOTS server:  A DOTS-aware network element handling and responding to
      messages from a DOTS client.  The DOTS server MAY enable
      mitigation on behalf of the DOTS client, if requested, by



Mortensen, et al.        Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   DDoS Open Threat Signaling Architecture   February 2016


      communicating the DOTS client's request to the mitigator and
      relaying any mitigator feedback to the client.  A DOTS server may
      also be a mitigator.

   DOTS relay:  A DOTS-aware network element positioned between a DOTS
      server and a DOTS client.  A DOTS relay receives messages from a
      DOTS client and relays them to a DOTS server, and similarly passes
      messages from the DOTS server to the DOTS client.

   DOTS agents:  A collective term for DOTS clients, servers and relays.

   signal channel:  A bidirectional, mutually authenticated
      communication layer between DOTS agents characterized by
      resilience even in conditions leading to severe packet loss, such
      as a volumetric DDoS attack causing network congestion.

   DOTS signal:  A concise authenticated status/control message
      transmitted between DOTS agents, used to indicate client's need
      for mitigation, as well as to convey the status of any requested
      mitigation.

   heartbeat:  A keep-alive message transmitted between DOTS agents over
      the signal channel, used to measure peer health.  Heartbeat
      functionality is not required to be distinct from signal.

   client signal:  A message sent from a DOTS client to a DOTS server
      over the signal channel, possibly traversing a DOTS relay,
      indicating the DOTS client's need for mitigation, as well as the
      scope of any requested mitigation, optionally including detected
      attack telemetry to supplement server-initiated mitigation.

   server signal:  A message sent from a DOTS server to a DOTS client
      over the signal channel.  Note that a server signal is not a
      response to client signal, but a DOTS server-initiated status
      message sent to the DOTS client, containing information about the
      status of any requested mitigation and its efficacy.

   data channel:  A secure communication layer between client and server
      used for infrequent bulk exchange of data not easily or
      appropriately communicated through the signal channel under attack
      conditions.

   blacklist:  a list of source addresses or prefixes from which traffic
      should be blocked.

   whitelist:  a list of source addresses or prefixes from which traffic
      should always be allowed, regardless of contradictory data gleaned
      in a detected attack.



Mortensen, et al.        Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   DDoS Open Threat Signaling Architecture   February 2016


1.2.  Scope

   This document defines an architecture for the proposed DOTS standard
   in the IETF.

   In this architecture, DOTS clients and servers communicate using the
   signaling mechanism established in the proposed DOTS standard.  As a
   result of signals from a DOTS client, the DOTS server may modify the
   network path of traffic destined for the attack target or targets,
   for example by diverting traffic to a scrubbing center.  Packets
   deemed part of an active attack may be dropped.

   The architecture presented here is assumed to be applicable across
   network administrative domains-as, for example, between an enterprise
   domain and the domain of a third-party attack scrubbing service-as
   well as to a single administrative domain.  DOTS is generally assumed
   to be most effective when aiding coordination of attack response
   between two or more participating network domains, but single domain
   scenarios are worth investigating elsewhere.

1.3.  Assumptions

   This document makes the following assumptions:

   o  The network or networks in which DOTS is deployed are assumed to
      offer the required connectivity between DOTS agents and any
      intermediary network elements, but the architecture imposes no
      additional limitations on the form of connectivity.

   o  There is no universal DDoS attack scale threshold triggering a
      coordinated response across network administrative domains.  A
      network domain administrator, or service or application owner may
      arbitrarily set attack scale threshold triggers, or manually send
      requests for mitigation.

   o  The mitigation capacity of networks requesting [AM: need def]
      coordinated attack response is opaque to any network receiving and
      potentially agreeing to intervene.

   o  The mitigation capacity of networks receiving requests for
      coordinated attack response is opaque to the network sending the
      request.  The network receiving the DOTS client signal may or may
      not have sufficient capacity to filter all or even the majority of
      DDoS attack traffic directed at a target.

   o  DOTS client and server signals, as well as messages sent through
      the data channel, are sent across any transit networks with the
      same probability of delivery of any other traffic between the DOTS



Mortensen, et al.        Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   DDoS Open Threat Signaling Architecture   February 2016


      client network and the DOTS server network.  Any encapsulation
      required for successful delivery is left untouched by transit
      network elements.

   o  The architecture allows for, but does not assume, the presence of
      Quality of Service (QoS) policy agreements between DOTS-enabled
      peer networks aimed at ensuring delivery of DOTS signals between
      DOTS agents.

2.  Architecture

   DOTS enables a target that is under a Distributed Denial-of-Service
   (DDoS) attack to signal another entity for help in mitigating the
   DDoS attack.  The basic high-level DOTS reference architecture is
   illustrated in Figure X1

         Mitigator ~~~~~~~~~~ DOTS Server
                                |     |
                                |     +---+
                                |         |
                                |       DOTS Relay
                                |         |
                                |     +---+
                                |     |
        Attack Target ~~~~~~~ DOTS Client

   A simple example instantiation of the DOTS architecture could be an
   enterprise as the attack target for a volumetric DDoS attack, and an
   upstream DDoS mitigation service as the Mitigator.  The enterprise
   (attack target) is connected to the Internet via a link that is
   getting saturated, and the enterprise suspects it is under DDoS
   attack.  The enterprise has a DOTS client, which obtains information
   about the DDoS attack, and signals the DOTS server for help in
   mitigating the attack.  The communication may be direct from the DOTS
   client to the DOTS Server, or it may traverse one or more DOTS
   Relays, which act as intermediaries.  The DOTS Server in turn invokes
   one or more mitigators, which are tasked with mitigating the actual
   DDoS attack, and hence aim to suppress the attack traffic while
   allowing valid traffic to reach the attack target.

   The scope of the DOTS specifications is the interface(s) between the
   DOTS client, DOTS server, and DOTS relay.  The interface(s) to the
   attack target and the mitigator are out of scope of DOTS.  Similarly,
   the operation of both the attack target and the mitigator are out of
   scope of DOTS.  Thus, DOTS neither speficies how an attack target
   decides it is under DDoS attack, nor does DOTS specify how a
   mitigator may actually mitigate it.




Mortensen, et al.        Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   DDoS Open Threat Signaling Architecture   February 2016


   [*FSA*: _However, should we say something about operational
   considerations nevertheless.  In particular, I'm thinking about M:N
   relationships, which doesn't necessarily seem wise.  Also, since we
   may be getting involved in traffic redirection, is there something to
   say about authorization of such requests - should a DOTS server just
   blindly redirect traffic for mitigation purposes, etc. based on what
   any DOTS client tells it ?_]

   As illustrated in Figure X2, there are two interfaces between the
   DOTS Server and the DOTS Client (and possibly the DOTS Relay).

    +----------------+                                 +----------------+
    |                | <------- Signal Channel ------> |                |
    |   DOTS Client  |                                 |  DOTS Server   |
    |                | <=======  Data Channel  ======> |                |
    +----------------+                                 +----------------+

   The primary purpose of the signal channel is for the DOTS client to
   ask the DOTS server for help in mitigating an attack, and for the
   DOTS server to inform the DOTS client about the status of such
   mitigation.  The DOTS client does this by sending a client signal,
   which contains information about the attack target.  The client
   signal may also include telemetry information about the attack, if
   the DOTS client has such information available.  The DOTS Server in
   turn sends a server signal to inform the DOTS client of whether it
   will honor the mitigation request.  Assuming it will, the DOTS Server
   initiates attack mitigation, and periodically informs the DOTS client
   about the status of the mitigation.  Similarly, the DOTS client
   periodically informs the DOTS server about the client's status, which
   at a minimum provides client (attack target) health information, but
   it may also include telemetry information about the attack as it is
   now seen by the client.  At some point, the DOTS client or the server
   may decide to terminate the server-side attack mitigation, which it
   indicates to the DOTS peer agent (DOTS client or server) over the
   signal channel.  Note that the signal channel may need to operate
   over a link that is experiencing a DDoS attack and hence is subject
   to very severe packet loss.

   [*FSA*: _Requirements document talks about having an always-on signal
   channel with on-going status messages - discuss further_]

   While DOTS is able to function with just the signal channel, the
   addition of the DOTS data channel provides for additional and more
   efficient capabilities.  The primary purpose of the data channel is
   to support DOTS related configuration and policy information between
   the DOTS client and the DOTS server.  Examples of such information
   include * Defining names or aliases for attack targets (resources).
   Those names can be used in subsequent signal channel exchanges to



Mortensen, et al.        Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   DDoS Open Threat Signaling Architecture   February 2016


   more efficiently refer to the resources (attack targets) in question.
   * Black-list management, which enables a DOTS client to inform the
   DOTS server about sources to suppress.  * White-list, which enables a
   DOTS client to inform the DOTS server about sources that should
   always be accepted.

   Note that while it is possible to exchange the above information
   before, during or after a DDoS attack, DOTS requires reliable
   delivery of the above information and does not provide any special
   means for ensuring timely delivery of it during an attack.  In
   practice, this means that DOTS entities SHOULD NOT rely on such
   information being exchanged during a DDoS attack.

2.1.  Relationships

   *[FSA: For discussion]*

   o  A DOTS Client is associated with one or more DOTS Servers (?)

   o  A DOTS Client is associated with one or more DOTS Relays (?)

   o  A DOTS Relay is assocaited with one or more DOTS Clients

   o  A DOTS Relay is associated with one or more DOTS Servers

   o  A DOTS Relay is associated with one or more DOTS Relays (graph/
      hierarchy ?)

   o  A DOTS Relay logically consists of a DOTS Server and a DOTS Client
      (?)

   o  Can a DOTS Client tell if it is talking to a DOTS Server or a DOTS
      Relay ?

   o  Can a DOTS Server tell if it is talking to a DOTS Client or a DOTS
      Relay ?

2.2.  DOTS Operational Process

   *[FSA: For discussion]* Although the scope of DOTS is focused on the
   signaling and data exchange between the DOTS client, DOTS server and
   (possibly) the DOTS relay, DOTS is specified with some underlying
   assumptions around the operational process associated with the use of
   DOTS.

   1.  Before a DOTS client can signal a DOTS server, a relationship
       needs to be established between the two.




Mortensen, et al.        Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   DDoS Open Threat Signaling Architecture   February 2016


   o  The relationship involves establishing credentials for mutual
      authentication.

   o  _What about authorization, e.g. in terms of resources we want to
      protect and hence potentially may be redirecting traffic for ?_

   TBD

2.3.  Concepts

   TBD

2.4.  Components

   TBD

2.5.  Obstacles

   TBD

3.  Security Considerations

   TBD

4.  Change Log

5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, DOI 10.17487/
              RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

5.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-dots-requirements]
              Mortensen, A., Moskowitz, R., and T. Reddy, "DDoS Open
              Threat Signaling Requirements", draft-ietf-dots-
              requirements-00 (work in progress), October 2015.

   [I-D.ietf-dots-use-cases]
              Dobbins, R., Fouant, S., Migault, D., Moskowitz, R.,
              Teague, N., and L. Xia, "Use cases for DDoS Open Threat
              Signaling", draft-ietf-dots-use-cases-00 (work in
              progress), October 2015.




Mortensen, et al.        Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   DDoS Open Threat Signaling Architecture   February 2016


Authors' Addresses

   Andrew Mortensen
   Arbor Networks, Inc.
   2727 S. State St
   Ann Arbor, MI  48104
   United States

   Email: amortensen@arbor.net


   Flemming Andreasen
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   United States

   Email: fandreas@cisco.com


   Christopher Gray
   Comcast, Inc.
   United States

   Email: Christopher_Gray3@cable.comcast.com


   Nik Teague
   Verisign, Inc.
   United States

   Email: nteague@verisign.com





















Mortensen, et al.        Expires August 14, 2016               [Page 10]
